{:title "What is a Theme?"
 :layout :post
 :tags  ["game design" "theme" "abstract" "experience" "mechanic"]}

[go]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/188/go
[chess]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/171/chess
[order]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_(biology)
[prismofeverything]: http://boardgamegeek.com/collection/user/prismofeverything
[lifeanddeath]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Life_and_death
[zoneplex]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/113070/zoneplex
[holography]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography
[feld]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/4958/stefan-feld
[luna]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/70512/luna
[aquasphere]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/159508/aquasphere
[eklund]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/174/phil-eklund
[bios]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/97915/bios-megafauna
[greenland]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/156501/greenland
[highfrontier]: http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/47055/high-frontier

This may be one of the most disputed game design topics on the internet.  I have heard people claim theme is irrelevant, and I have heard people claim theme is the only thing that matters.  There are so many conflicting definitions it seems impossible to even clarify what anyone is really talking about.  It is a polarizing and divisive topic.  Is there any way to make sense of the chaos here?

### Extremes

In seeking clarity, I find it helpful to consider the extremes.  I spent years playing only [Go][go], and I still consider it the greatest game ever devised by humankind.  (In fact, of [all the games in my collection][prismofeverything] it is my only '10').  It has the simplest ruleset of any game I can think of, and its depth is boundless.  And, it has blatantly no theme.  Even [Chess][chess], the other king of abstracts, has more theme (Kings!  Queens!  Knights!  Bishops!  Pawns....).  And even [Go][go] has [Life and Death][lifeanddeath].  It seems even in the most themeless of games, some relationship to existence is unavoidable.  Let's fix [Go][go] as one pole in the spectrum of theme.

On the other end of the spectrum we have something like Live Action Role Playing... something where the theme is kind of the whole point.  In something like this, the entire activity is oriented around evoking a world and a story, where the more believable and absorbing the experience is the more successful it is.  What is the "mechanic" in LARP'ing?  I don't know, I know they have rules... but they are clearly secondary.  Let's fix LARP as the other pole in the thematic spectrum.

We still haven't defined "theme", but we can say what the extremes are?  This is clearly questionable, but it is helpful for now.

### The Importance of Theme

I used to be one of the people who said the theme didn't matter at all, that a game is entirely its mechanic and the "theme" was merely a cosmetic layer over this fundamental core (this is when I was playing a lot of [Go][go]).  But over time and after playing many different kinds of games, this view shifted until now I see them both as an inseparable part of evoking an "experience".

But what is an "experience"?

### Game as Holographic Experience

In a way, every game has many dimensions.  The first, and most immediate, is the actual _bits_.  The board (if it has one), cards, pieces, markers, tracks, tokens, meeples and every other physical component.

Then there is the design and the _art_.  This can range from minimal to mind-blowing, but either way there is generally some effort made to unify the art across the bits so that everything seems consistent in the gestalt (a notable exception is [Zoneplex][zoneplex], but this game has other problems).

Then there are the _rules_.  These are the allowed interactions you can have with the bits and with other players.  In general, if you have the rules right, you could play with any bits as long as all the players agree on what they all mean and what corresponds to what.  

In this progression we have been moving from the realm of the physical towards the realm of the mind.  The bits exist in the world, and so does the art, but they are meant to be apprehended and seen.  The rules may be written in a book, but they live in the mind and guide the actions of the players.  

At the ultimate level of all this is where all of these things come together: the _experience_.  The experience of a game is a mystical thing.  In the end all of the bits and art and rules and everything else that *exists* in the world is a platform for the experience to happen in the minds of all the players.  The mind is where the *game* actually happens.

If everyone were cognitively capable of tracking everything, we could all dispense with the bits and just play directly in our minds.  (I had a friend who we would try to play chess just by calling out the moves and tracking everything from memory.  This inevitably lead to disputes and failure).  

But it is more practical and fun to use the bits to support the game that is happening in everyone's mind.  The bits serve as an independent authority on the state of the game, and as a focal point for shared action that everyone can witness as it happens.  The bits unite everyone's independent experience into a shared one.  

Sometimes the bits itself are mistaken for the game, but this is an error.  The bits trigger things in the mind, but the mind is where the action is.  Without the mind to give them meaning, the bits would just be inert and pointless things.  This is why I always have the image of the game emerging [holographically][holography] from the bits.  

So this is where the art and mechanics come in.  They are there to encourage a mind to have a certain kind of experience.  Every game has a variety of experiences they trigger, and it is this experience that the game player is seeking.  And this gives us a clue as to what a "theme" is:  A theme is the kinds of experiences a game encourages inside a mind beyond simply the mechanics and decision space.  Did you just score 12 points?  Or did you just slay the dragon terrorizing the village?  Since we exist in a sea of experiences and since experiences are the medium of the mind, a theme can evoke an experience that is just as real as an experience we have out in the world.  

This is where the relationship between games and reality occurs.  The world is full of "bits":  rocks, trees, sky, fire, other people.  Our mind is the thing that turns them into experiences.  So essentially, the same dynamic is at work whether the experience happened in the "world" or whether it happens in a "game".  Experience is experience.  

### Stripping the Theme

One of my favorite exercises is to imagine a game if all theme has been stripped away.  Replace everything with white and black abstract symbols and simple geometric shapes.  Would it still evoke the theme?  In this case the only place the theme could come from is the dynamics inherent in the mechanic.  This is my test for how essential the theme of a game is to its mechanic (dubbed the "Blank Art" test).

One of the most common criticism of a game is that the theme is "pasted on".  You hear this all the time in game forums (usually about a [Feld][feld] game).  Even when it has an extravagant theme like [Luna][luna] or [AquaSphere][aquasphere] (which may have been motivated by the criticisms about the lack of theme!) it still gets accused of being "pasted on".  Why?

I feel it is because these games would generally fail the "Blank Art" test.  The most amazing art in the world means nothing if it doesn't have some relationship to what people are doing in the game.  Conversely, bad or minimal art can be amazing when synchronized with what the players are actually doing. 

[Luna][luna] and [AquaSphere][aquasphere] (both of which are really enjoyable games by the way) have elaborate and even fantastical art.  If all of that art were stripped away these games would still be enjoyable (because the mechanics are masterfully designed), but they would never evoke the idea of being an aspiring Moon priestess or exploring and harvesting from an underwater laboratory.  

There are some other notable games where the reverse is true.  One of my other favorite game designers, [Phil Eklund][eklund], makes some of the most intricate games known to man.  Criticized for being overly complex and fiddly, if you spend enough time with them there is something magical going on in his games.  Take [Bios Megafauna][bios].  You play a biological [Order][order] over geological time scales, speciating, adapting and competing with other animals in a fluctuating world of hazard and extinction.  Tectonic plates shift, volcanoes spew greenhouse gasses, and biomes wink in and out of existence.

Daunting to learn, this game can seem chaotic and brutal.  But if you stripped away all of the art and wildly specific flavor text (hindgut digestion?  Dentition contests?)  and played it long enough, I think you would end up guessing the original theme with uncanny accuracy.  Questions like "Why when I expand on the board can I send one of my existing shapes or start a new one?  Why do the letters on these cards let me occupy the spaces on the board with those same letters?  Why when I use a new shape can I give it some of the letters from the shape I am expanding from?  Why when certain cards flip over do the areas on the map shift up and down?"  Countless details like this would eventually lead the curious game player to something like evolution, speciation, adaptation and tectonic drift.  Every detail mixed into this elaborate mechanic is there for one reason:  to evoke the experience of what it would be like to look out the eyes of an entire biological Order over millions of years in a constantly shifting and brutally unforgiving world.  Now THAT is a theme.  

His other games have a similar quality.  In [Greenland][greenland] I feel like I am fighting for survival in a barren and inhospitable wasteland, struggling with other cultures over meager resources.  And [High Frontier][highfrontier] is so close to feeling like actual rocket science that I am almost tempted to apply to NASA simply on this merit alone.

You can tell this is the ethic he brings to bear when designing a game.  He is trying to evoke an experience through the mechanics themselves, then makes some art to support it, not just picking some art to go with a cool mechanic he made in a narrative vacuum (however cool that mechanic turns out to be!).

### Theme and Mechanic

This is where the theme and mechanic meet:  they are both in the service of the experience.  Having a mechanic alone can make a good game, whereas having a theme alone is not really a game.  It is art, it is a story, but not a game.  But if the mechanic is in support of a solid theme, if the dynamics are aligned with a narrative and a visual style that really come to life, then you can create an experience you cannot get to with mechanics alone, or theme alone!  This is where the theme and mechanic fuse into something greater than the sum of its parts, and the experience emerges from the bits and becomes a thing of the mind.  This fusion and this quality are why I now consider the theme to be an essential part of the game experience.  There is so much potential to evoke an amazing experience from a game (as opposed to a story or a movie or a painting) because in a game the player is an active participant in how things unfold.  In a game the player has agency, and their decisions affect the outcome and become part of the fabric of the story that is told.  

The best game I can imagine is not one where afterwards the players simply said "You won by X points" but one where everyone says "I learned something and/or I will remember that forever."  Or even "my life has changed".  Now THAT would be a great game!